The subject of this show is Science Fiction...no.
The subject of this show is Computers and Science Fiction.
As a theme in Science Fiction, computers is a relative latecomer because you had to have
machinery before computers.
The industrial revolution of the 19th century would be when machinery was mostly invented
when it proliferated.
You really couldn't have a good machine story or computer story until you had a technological
society.
So it's a relative latecomer, but there's always been a controversy about machinery
and about computers.
Are they the saviors of mankind or are they mankind's bane?
Will they destroy him eventually or take over?
Will they get out of control?
As long ago as 1811, there were riots in England by a group of people called the Luddites
who were traveling around London destroying machinery, particularly textile machinery.
They thought it was going to cost them their jobs.
They thought machinery was a dangerous thing and they would simply walk around destroying
machines.
This was back in 1811.
But at least since that time, there's always been a problem with machinery.
Is it...
I don't know what the problem is.
Back up and start that party at least.
At least since that time.
But at least since that time, there has been two different ways of taking machinery.
Are they going to be the saviors of mankind or mankind's destroyer?
Now, computers, of course, are a special type of machinery.
Computers would be one of the most recent devices or concepts used in science fiction
stories.
Computers have been used in science fiction stories since the 30s, but they changed significant
in the 50s when the integrated circuit came about.
Computers before were...
The science fiction writer really had no...
The science fiction writer really had nothing to base his computer on in reality.
But once computers came into use in the 50s and 60s, the computer stories changed radically.
I think one of the biggest questions that arises with a computer is if they will ever
be intelligent.
Will they ever be able to reach the point where they can form judgments, where they
can exercise common sense?
Is it possible or are they only going to be a tool of man?
In a recent discussion with James P. Hogan, author of Two Faces Tomorrow, he told us that
the current technological level for computers is far too low for them to have any sort of
machine intelligence at present, although they are making several advances in different
areas.
One of the main thrusts that a computer would have to have is to be to anticipate.
One of the main things a computer would have to do is to be able to perceive its environment
in the same way that a human being does, transforming information from concrete information to symbolic
information and then making analogies with known information and then deriving some sort
of response from that.
At present, it's not possible for computers to manipulate data and that's...
some science fiction writers have created books or stories in which a computer is in
some way blended with a human being so you have some kind of hybrid, a machine and a
man.
And when you think about it, that's not too far out.
Consider for instance today, bionics, people with pacemakers, prosthetics, and so on.
We are blending humans with machines today.
Why not conceive of a brain, a human brain?
Partially at least perhaps being plugged into or combined with a machine, a computer.
I don't see why this couldn't be possible and maybe not that very far in the future.
What's the book that deals with that?
A Fireship is one.
Let's talk about it.
For instance, a very fine novella by a woman science fiction writer, Joan Vinge, posits
a hybrid, a third entity coming about because of the blend of a human being with a computer.
This human has an operation and a socket is implanted in his spine and a computer, a
very high speed, a very portable computer is plugged into that socket.
And when this happens, the mind of the human blends with the computer and a third entity
is formed, a new being, a creature called Ethan Ring in the human's body of course.
And he undergoes various adventures.
First of all, escapes the experimenters.
He earns money by gambling.
Of course, the computer can give him all sorts of immediate odds.
So he's very successful at gambling.
He gets involved in various intrigues.
Of course, he can't unplug himself from the computer and go back to the human being he was before.
A pretty dim-witted one at that.
But it's an interesting idea, probably the ultimate in blending a man and a machine, that kind of book.
That's a fairly recent book.
I think this is probably better than some of the stories that have a computer that has human characteristics.
But there's no explanation of why it has human characteristics.
It just takes on a human personality, simply by the ages of the writer.
And perhaps the better stories are like the one that you just told us about, where you have a blend of an actual human and computer parts.
Or the kind of story that tells us how a computer might come about having some of the same type of emotional reactions that a human brain would have.
One of the most successful novels I think about computers, it actually was a trilogy by a man named DJ Jones, a Colossus.
The first volume published in 1967.
It told of a computer link-up between a huge United States computer and a Russian one.
After the link-up, the computer becomes sort of a super entity, achieves intelligence and actually takes over the world.
It speaks through a man called Forban.
And he's the spokesman of the computer, but the computer is sort of a benevolent dictator.
He rules mankind.
He seems to have a personality.
He seems to be steering man toward a peaceful kind of society.
Following the trilogy to its end, it does have an optimistic ending.
I think Jones probably would say that the machine is needed.
But without it, without it, I guess you'd say it's certain guidance that man probably would have destroyed himself,
had not the computer taken over the facilities for bombs and weapons and so forth.
Ever since they made their appearance in science fiction novels, machines or computers have basically been considered in two ways,
depending on the particular author.
They can either be beneficial to mankind, they can be his savior, his helper, his partner,
or there have been at least an equal amount of books in which the computer is an enemy, in which it's malevolent or somehow hostile to mankind.
Probably the best known of computers in science fiction is Howe in Arthur C. Clarke's famous story 2001 at Space Odyssey.
Howe, of course, was designed.
Howe was designed to be the onboard computer for the spaceship that was taking the men out to investigate the signal that was sent out by the alien block or monolith.
The computer onboard the ship controlled all the functions of the ship and was indirectly, of course, involved in the mission itself.
It's not too clear whether Howe just had a breakdown of some sort or whether he was intentionally doing what he did because of a judgment on his part.
The story seems to indicate that he did make a judgment that he thought the humans were not dependable enough for the mission to be completed successfully,
and so he simply eliminated the humans and took over the mission himself.
He killed one member out in space who was working in a pod away from the ship, and when his friend goes out to help him, the computer shuts the ship off and he can't get back in.
He also kills the people who are in suspended animation and waiting the arrival of the ship at its destination.
One of the interesting scenes in that movie was when the two surviving crew members to escape Howe, they have to get into one of the landers, I guess it is, where he can't hear them.
But Howe can read lips through one of the windows and he sees that they're plotting against him and, of course, continues to plot against their lives.
But Howe, of course, is one of the, I guess you'd have to classify him as one of the malevolent computers, one of the evil ones.
Another one, or another malevolent computer, can be found in Harlan Ellison's short story, I have no mouth but I'm a scream.
It's about a computer who, after the massive destruction of the earth, the computer has trapped five people down below the earth,
and the computer is so, I guess you call malevolent, or hateful of what has happened, that it is decided that it is going to torture these people forever.
It's made them immortal and it's going to inflict all sorts of physiological and psychological torture on them.
One of the persons manages to kill the other four, but the computer stops him from killing himself and biologically reconstructs him into a blob with no mouth, and in horrible pain, and ergo the title, I have no mouth but I'm a scream.
That's almost a surrealistic story. Ellison, of course, belongs to the new wave movement in science fiction.
I would classify most of his work as fairly pessimistic. If I recall the reason, it's kind of vague why the computer hates these human beings so badly, why he tortures them,
but at one time he says that you gave me intelligence, you gave me life, you gave me sentience and I'll never forgive you for it.
Almost as if life is something he didn't want and he's going to get even with the people for giving it to him, which of course is a very pessimistic view of anything.
But I think one of the best and one of the most recent books about computers is The Two Faces of Tomorrow by James P. Hogan.
Hogan is an American citizen, he was a British subject but he came in American citizen.
He is an expert on computers, he has designed computer systems, he's sold computers, he's worked with his scientists to whom he sold computers.
He's very knowledgeable about the subject and he's now writing full time various kinds of science fiction novels, but his basic training, his basic skills I think are in the area of computers.
And that makes The Two Faces of Tomorrow I think one of the most realistic of all computer books and probably one of the most optimistic too.
The story behind it.
The basis behind the story is that the world is hooked up with a worldwide computer system and it's having difficulty making proper judgments.
The computer system called Titan, for example, has asked a question on the moon, there are people who are setting up a station and they need an area leveled off and they send in a request to the computer and they say,
well, how can the job come in 21 minutes, how are they going to get the equipment out there to do it?
Well, what the computer does is it diverts some loads at a mass driver, a device which is literally flinging huge chunks of the moon off into orbit.
It diverts some of its loads of mass or moon rocks to that particular area on the moon.
It diverts some of the loads of moon rocks that particular area on the moon and literally bashes the area flat.
It doesn't take into account that there are people there.
That brings on the need for possibly a higher order of computer which should make a more rational judgment.
Right, Titan simply made the... well, it was a logical machine.
It made the most logical decision.
It was told to get rid of this ridge as quickly and as expeditiously as it could.
And it did that. It was a perfectly logical decision.
But what it lacked was the common sense to realize there were men in the area that they could be injured.
It did not have the intelligence to realize that even though it was an extremely logical machine.
I think it knew that there were people there but it simply didn't have the wherewithal to realize that there is anything wrong with that.
And so it's up to this... oh, I guess you'd call it a group of people, university people, government people back on earth to deal with the problem.
They have the question, should we go ahead with computer research that will allow us to cause a more intelligent computer, a common sense computer to come into being, or should we give it up?
The reason, of course, that they had to consider this is that once you begin getting to the point where a computer can make common sense types of judgments or decisions,
it also might develop some of the other things that go along with a more sophisticated intelligence, things like a will to survive, and if it should, in fact, develop a will to survive,
it might also want to protect itself at the cost of humans that might be running it.
And with that will to protect itself, of course, it would have to make decisions, it would have to be able to correlate information and develop a maturity and intelligence of common sense, which it had not previously had.
The author, James P. Hogan, in the book, James Hogan... fuck.
One of the precepts that Hogan uses in the book is that of survival, being that the computer needs to decide, is this best for my survival or is this not best for my survival?
They program the computer that it's... one of its basic aims is that to survive, it must survive.
The first process that they go through in trying to find out whether or not a machine like this would be harmful is the experimentation with a very advanced machine called PHYS, F-I-S-E, that is in the university laboratories.
It's set up to do... it's set up to do rudimental common sense type judgments.
They've set up a laser display area that simulates a kitchen room, and they have two characters that are controlled by PHYS, a humanoid, a human character, and a dog.
The rest of the environment is controlled by other computers that will react in the way that normal things would react.
If you drop a glass on the floor, it will break because of what the other computers are programmed to.
PHYS is in control of the humanoid and the dog, and he is... wait a minute, does he control the dog?
PHYS is in control of the human, and he is instructed to try to learn what the human should do in that correct situation in the kitchen.
He eventually ends up cooking breakfast and dealing with the dog in the way that a human should.
Before he learns that, though, one of the learning procedures he goes through is he takes some material out of the refrigerator and then leaves it out, and the humans come and they tell him,
well, the produce is going to spoil if you leave it out of the refrigerator, so PHYS makes an analogy and so...
and he picks up the material and puts it in the refrigerator, and he also picks up the dog and puts him in the refrigerator because he feels if the refrigerator is a better habitat for the produce,
and it's probably a better habitat for the dog also.
And then he has to go through another learning process to learn that the refrigerator is not exactly a desirable habitat for a living being.
PHYS makes slow progress in generalizing. What they want to do is to teach them how to generalize, how to use common sense.
And, for instance, the way this works, they will have PHYS learn that the human being, which is being simulated, can be hurt by certain things, say by broken glass or by getting burnt or something.
And at one point in the experiment, PHYS suddenly realizes that the dog, called Brutus, can also be hurt by the same things that hurt the human being.
And the people are ecstatically happy over this because even though to us that would be a very primitive kind of generalization, for a machine to make that, that was a big thing.
Bring his level down just a little.
But of course all this is in the laboratory. They're going slowly, they are taking their time, they're being very careful about the steps which they initiate.
But when the trouble with Titan comes up, when it starts to harm people because of its lack of common sense,
they have to find a way to either give up the research and forget about computers or learn more about them and make them safe by teaching them actual common sense.
The trouble with that is if they tried to go ahead and hook up a very, very intelligent computer into the Titan network, if in fact it did develop a self-survival drive and try to protect itself,
it would be in control of the entire Earth, there would be no turning back, it would be a one time only step from which there would be no escape.
The dilemma then is whether or not to hook it up to the Earth system. If they do, they may be sorry and the entire human population of the Earth may be at stake.
If they don't, then they'll never find out exactly what might happen and progress will stagnate right there.
What they have available to them though is an incompleted satellite orbiting the Earth and the military suggest, well, we should take this advanced computer system up there and set it up and tell it to survive and then in order to test its survival abilities, they attack it.
This satellite is in fact a space colony and it's very well suited to this purpose because it's like a miniature world. It has an area that is inhabited that has cities and an area that has like farmlands and a recreational area of rocky mountains and things like this,
all inside a very large bicycle type wheel that rotates for gravity. The same station has within it manufacturing facilities that take raw moon rock that's being shuttled up from the moon and processes it into all of the machines and all of the things that they need to run this colony.
The setup is very appropriate for this because like we said it's a miniature world and the computer can take this and simulate the Earth without actually putting the Earth in danger.
If they find out that the computer, by the way, they ultimately call it Spartacus that they put into this space colony, if the computer can run this micro planet, this miniature world to the benefit of the human beings on it, then presumably it would be able to do the same thing for the real Earth.
So they consider it to be a very effective experiment and to be sure that innocent people aren't hurt, they populate this space colony with trained personnel, with the military for instance, with scientists, not with common citizens, people who would be aware of the dangers and be presumably able to take care of problems that would come up.
What they don't anticipate is how well the computer is able to defend itself and manipulate its own environment.
They've tried to set up a series of, I don't know what the word is I'm trying to forget.
The scientists have set up a series of override operations and functions that they can try to shut down the computer in case it begins to get out of hand.
The computer however is extremely fast and extremely innovative, it overrides, their overrides, it redesigns the power system so that they cannot pull the plug on the computer and it begins to take over the backup systems too.
This all happens so rapidly that the scientists and military people involved simply don't have time to find out what's going on before it's way too late to do anything about it.
There is ultimately one system that the computer is not aware of, in fact none of the people on the space ship, none of the people on the space colony are aware of in the fact that there isn't an explosive device on the space colony which could destroy it completely along with everyone and the computer.
Right, that's just in case that Spartacus turns out to be too powerful and takes over. I think just maybe two or three people on this micro planet know this but the Omega, I think it's an atomic device.
It can be detonated from Earth so that Spartacus does get out of control then they can simply destroy it. Of course they would destroy all the human beings there but it's for their own protection that they're doing this.
It's a last resort device.
Spartacus has been designing drones. These are mobile robotic type devices that are capable of manipulating machines and building new parts of the machine itself.
It has begun to manipulate these drones to become weapons of war. It has attacked first the machines that the humans are using and eventually it figures that the humans themselves are the cause of its problem and it attacks them.
It really doesn't know what the human beings are. It simply refers to them as the shapes.
This coming from its optical sensors that can see the things that are around its robots.
And at a certain point it suddenly realizes that the reason that it is having trouble, the reason that some of its terminals are being shut off and so forth is because of these shapes.
So it makes a decision, well I better get rid of them. And so for a while it attempts to destroy the shapes which of course are the human beings.
The result of that is ensues a terrific battle between the human personnel on the station and the computer and its drones.
This evolves at a very, very rapid rate until the entire colony is almost completely taken over by Spartacus with people trying just to get away without even trying to fight the thing.
They're just trying to get away and it really doesn't work out too well for most of them.
At one point Spartacus even manages to extend its drones and its awareness outside of this micro planet, this space colony.
It manufactures missiles that actually home in on the people who are trying to escape.
The humans suddenly realize they better get out of there so they try to evacuate.
Spartacus doesn't allow it. He manufactures missiles that destroy them or attempt to as they try to take off.
One of the turning points in the novel comes when the space station has a device called a decoupler.
Part of the space station is rotating and the other part of the space station is stationary relative to the part that it...
A major turning point in the novel comes when two personnel on the space station try and repair part of the station itself.
Part of the space station is rotating in order to affect an artificial gravity and the other part is stationary in relation to the Earth.
When they go to a remote terminal and start trying to figure out some mathematical formulas which will allow for this imbalance between the rotating and non-rotating part,
Spartacus immediately senses that one of its terminals has been activated and it sends some drones over to investigate and destroy anything that's being manipulated with.
But it also can tell what information is being accessed and Spartacus is also aware that something is wrong with the system.
And it makes a huge jump in reasoning in its relation to it is trying to facilitate repairs on this imbalance and these shapes are also trying to facilitate repairs on this imbalance.
Well, at that point, Spartacus makes the key decision of the whole novel. He suddenly opens himself up.
He puts his defenses at rest. He indicates to the people where they can turn him off.
And in essence, he says, OK, you can turn me off if you want to.
He realizes that the shapes are intelligences just like him.
And they also must survive and that is his prime, if you will, prime directive.
His prime directive is survival is paramount and he has been causing these shapes to cease to survive.
And once he makes that generalization, he does a computer version of oops and then allows himself to be opened up and shut down if necessary.
Yeah, that's the same thing that happened back on Earth with FI's when the more primitive FI's computer generalized from people to dogs so they could both be hurt.
What Spartacus in essence has done is said, OK, I want to survive. I'm a being. These shapes are the same thing. They're beings.
They must want to survive too. And that's the generalization that they want the computer to be able to make.
And it does so at the last minute and says, OK, I realize what you are here. You can shut me down.
Now, the people to their benefit do not shut down the computer. They say, well, the experiment is a success.
We have finally come up with a computer that can make rational judgments that has a sense of conscious.
And they decide instead of shutting it down and recreating the experiment on the Earth, they simply going to transport this computer from its location to space colony back down to Earth.
This would eliminate all of the intermediary battling that they did with the computer from occurring on Earth.
It's already been taken care of. It's already passed. So if they just take Spartacus and install him into the Titan system on Earth, he will be already, to the point where he is aware of humans and their needs.
To back up for just a minute, when the humans have to make that decision about whether to turn him off or not, it comes about that only one human being, the protagonist of the novel, Ron Dyer.
Ray.
Ray Dyer.
Back up and do it again.
It comes about that only one human being, Ray Dyer, who is the protagonist of the novel, who knows more about the computer than anybody, he is the only one who realizes what Spartacus has done.
The other people there, most of them are military. They come in with weapons and so forth. They're ready to destroy. And they don't understand computers that well.
But Dyer is the only one who realizes what Spartacus has done. He doesn't say anything. He just tells the military, OK, Spartacus is not going to attack anymore. He's safe.
We get the impression that had the military or had anybody else know, they could turn Spartacus off at that moment they would have.
And the reason I think that's so tremendously important is that that seems to be the whole decision of the novel or the whole thing that Hogan is working with.
The culmination, the climax, OK, if Dyer turns it off, in essence he's turning off computers, forget them, they're too dangerous.
If he leaves it on, he is allowing hope for the future. They can help us, they can be safe. He makes the decision to let Spartacus live.
And later on, when he tells everybody what he's done, he convinces them that it would be best to just take Spartacus, who's already evolved a common sense, take it back to Earth and simply plug it into the Earth system they have at that time.
In our interview with James Hogan, we asked him about machine intelligence.
Stand by.
The decision to allow Spartacus to live and to become part of, to run the Earth, become part of its computer system, I think indicates Hogan's basic optimism.
He does have a great deal of positive opinion about the future, about machinery, about computers in particular.
There are people in the novel, though, who are down on machines, they're very negative, they're very skeptical that they should ever trust a computer or machinery in general.
And one of those people is a woman, Laura, who, Dyer, the protagonist, he gets involved with her.
And she's sort of a foil to Dyer. She is always there to say, well, why do this? Why trust the computer? This is stupid, etc.
And at one point, about halfway through the novel, when they're on the space colony, when they're on Janus, she suddenly realizes that they are on a small world.
It has soil, it has an atmosphere, it can grow things. It's a beautiful place. And she realizes science has done this.
And so she turns to Dyer, they've taken a walk up into the mountains on this micro-planet. She turns to Dyer and says, it really works, doesn't it?
He says, what does? She says, science, it works. Dyer expresses surprise at this because she's never been pro-science before.
And she continues in this way. It's okay, this really is me talking. It's just that, well, everything I've seen since we came here, it's all too incredible to be real, but it is.
Whatever people had to learn to build something like this, they had to get it right.
You know what I mean? There's no room to fool yourself when you take on this kind of thing.
There are so many other ologies and isms and all kinds of stuff that people spend their whole lives believing, but they're all fooling themselves, aren't they?
They never have to prove it by doing something like this. Something where there's no getting away from the fact that it either works or it doesn't.
In other words, Hogan is talking about practicalities, about basics, and ology, and ism, and idea, philosophy.
It doesn't mean anything. If something works, it's valuable.
And to Hogan, this computer complex, this whole idea of machine intelligence is something that works.
And his whole book is one optimistic statement to try to communicate that to readers.
There are at least two characters in the book who bring up an interesting idea that Hogan seems to be playing with.
The possibility that machines are simply the next step in evolution, that man who's evolved from multicellular organisms up to the present state.
All of this has been organic.
Now man will use his brain, which is a product of organic evolution, to create machines, computers,
and that is simply the next natural step in evolution, and that machines are here to take our place.
They're what's beyond us. They will be superior. They will be the next step in evolution.
And a couple of the characters in the book play with that idea.
In talking with Hogan, he himself doesn't believe this.
He believes that it might be possible for us to design and build a computer by using DNA molecules
and manipulating them genetically to build an organism which can think.
And that organism, this organic computer would then be used to...
This organic computer would then be the next step in computer evolution as well as possibly in man's intellectual evolution.
Hogan, however, in the end of the book, Two Faces for Tomorrow.
Hogan, however, in the book, The Two Faces of Tomorrow seems to indicate that this would not be the case, at least not immediately.
He indicates that there would be a partnership between the humans and the computer machine that they have created
to go out and explore the universe and carry on mankind's destiny.
He's used this before in one of his other novels, The General Giants of Ganymede,
and the persona of the computer, Zorak, and the aliens which designed and built him.
They have a sort of symbiotic relationship between each other.
The computer helps them to their betterment and they help the computer to access and gain and manipulate knowledge.
I think Hogan also, a further example of his optimism,
working with a computer like Spartacus, the capabilities that it has and that it will continue to evolve,
Hogan suggests very strongly at the end of the book that this is what we will have to have,
this kind of partnership with machinery to get out of the solar system,
to have interstellar flight, to have colonies outside the solar system.
He thinks the universe is there to conquer, uses a phrase similar to that at the end of the book,
and that with the machine we have a chance at it. Without the machine we don't.
As it's interesting to note that both the people and Spartacus, the computer, are both very optimistic on their return trip to Earth.
The computer is anticipating all the new things that it's going to learn,
and the people are anticipating all the new uses that they're going to be able to put the computer to.
But I think the book then is characteristic of all of Hogan's work.
No matter if he's writing about time travel or alien contact or computers,
he's one of the, I think probably one of the most optimistic of all science fiction writers,
and I think it's refreshing to have an author of this type working today,
because there are many people or many writers who think that man is on a dead end,
that he's hurting himself, he's polluting his environment, he's contributing to his own destruction.
Hogan takes the opposite viewpoint all the way. He thinks science can be very beneficial,
machines can be our saviors if we work with them intelligently.
And I think it's a very good thing that we have writers of this type today.
Stand by.
Frederick Brown has written a classic computer story that's also a humorous one,
simply called Answer, written back in the 50s.
And the thrust of the story is that the whole earth is linking up all of their computers.
They're making a huge network to make it a powerful, super kind of computer, a very powerful machine.
And when they do that, they have the purpose of answering one, of asking one ultimate question.
They get the computer already, all the link-ups are made, the whole world is waiting.
They ask it the question, is there a God?
The computer pauses for a few moments and types out, there is now.
Now Hogan would not go that far.
Hogan would not say we create a God or we create something superior.
I think all it's saying is that we can create a partner to help us as we go into the future.